---
layout: post
title: "New Job and Distributed Agile"
category: Development
tags: [job]
summary: New job.
---


Well, my blogging has been a bit rare of late. I've had lots of ideas about things  to post about, but nothing has happened! So, now that I'm starting a new job soon, I'm going to try and get back on the blogging bandwagon and share my development journey here :)

### New job

I'll soon be starting a new job at [mediaburst](http://www.mediaburst.co.uk) :) I'm very excited about this, it's a partly remote role, and I'm really looking forwards to getting stuck in. 

### Agile

One thing mediaburst were keen to talk to me about during my interview (apart from my favourite beer), was agile, and how that could work when most of the developers are partly remote. It's a very good question, and it will be interesting to see how it pans out. In a previous job, I've been lucky to work with the awesome IT consultancy ThoughtWorks. We handed over a piece of functionality to their Chinese dev team, and of course with it being ThoughtWorks that was handled with an agile process. It actually worked really well - we used a group IM app like Campfire for the daily standup (which was just as effective as a real standup, the only downside being it lasted longer), and we used Mingle (a web based agile management tool from ThoughtWorks) to manage the stories, estimate, and break the backlog down into sprints. I'd say the hardest thing was discussing technically how something was going to be implemented, and making sure that the BA/QA team in China had as good an understanding as we had of the story. But we managed that pretty well with emails and conference calls when needed so, overall, it was a success. 

I think one contributory factor in its success was the experience of the entire team with agile (especially the TW guys) - so when faced with an issue of any sort we all pretty much knew how to resolve the issue.

If the team is pretty new to the whole agile process, then it's obviously going to be a little harder to grok if the team is partly remote. But, if you can get the team together say one day a week, then that should be enough to tackle any problems - especially if that day is synced so that the whole team is in that day and the focus is on planning the next sprint.

Theres some related and interesting insights from [this](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/29680/is-remote-agile-sustainable) stack exchange question - in which most people report success. And of course with companies like 37Signals embracing remote working and an agile process, it shows what can be achieved.

Anyway, enough about that. It should be interesting :)


