---
layout: post
title: "Dapper"
category: Development
tags: [c#]
summary: Introducing Dapper into a existing ORM-less Project
---
{% include JB/setup %}

## Introducing Dapper into a existing ORM-less Project

We have an existing web application that uses a mysql database. Being a fairly mature application in some parts, it uses ADO.NET directly for the data access, so you've got hand-crafted SQL being fired against the database.

We wanted to bring this more upto-date, and have a lightweight DAL that doesn't stomp all over the existing stuff (so ideally complemenets it rather than entirely replace it). From personal experience of the last few years using Linq to SQL and Entity Framework, I wanted something that didn't rely on Linq for the query language. I love Linq and it's a joy to use, AND is a simple way to execute simple quueries against the database quickly. But when you start getting serious with your queries - even when you just throw a few LEFT JOINS in there, then you start to suffer - how many Stack Overflow posts are there in the vein of "How to write this SQL in Linq..".. So, because of this and the experience built up firing SQL using an IDbConnection object, it looked like an ideal bunch of requirements for a Micro-ORM like Dapper or Massive. I discounted Massive because it maps to dynamic objects, and we already had a bunch of mostly-POCO objects that we wanted to map to, so enter Dapper!

## Enter Dapper

Dapper is one of those little projects that makes you smile whwen you use it (or is that just me?). You get 2 extension methods on top of an IDbConnection, the main one being `.Query<>` that allows you to fire sql against the db and get the results into an object of your choising. As a noddy example:

	var products = conn.Query<Product>("Select * from products where DateCreated = @DateCreated",new {DateCreated = date});

It's pretty obvious what this line is going to do, the nice thing is that when you run it you get the results automatically mapped into a List of products. Nice.

The source for the Dapper class is a single file you can throw into your project. The code uses a reasonable amount of reflection internally to do it's magic, and more than a sprinkiling of direct IL emmitting, which frankly scares me and impresses me in equal measures :)

## Column Mapping

One thing that immediately became an issue for us was how dapper maps columns in the database to properties on the result object. By default it looks for matches, so a field productid in the database maps to a property PropertyId in the class. But for us, this straight mapping did not exist. For our database, the column names sometimes needed entirely remapping (e.g db.name --> Class.Title), or for the most part we just needed to resolve underscores in the database (e.g. db.product_id -> Class.ProductId). Fortunately, Dapper is pretty flexible, and it gets round this using an ITypeMap interface. You can implemeent this class and then hook this into Dapper. For us, we used a simple combination of allowing a class property to have an attribute to define the column mapping, and failiing the presence of that, we handle the removal of the underscores manually. If anyone is looking to do this, I'd recommend taking a look at the CustomPropertyTypeMap class in Dapper. That class allows you to define your own rules and then you can plug this into Dapper using 	SqlMapper.SetTypeMap (it's explaned well in this Stack Overflow post)

## Wrapping Dapper

Because dapper is a simple class that provides minimal ORM functionality, theres a lot that you don't get, that you might want. For example, here's some simple EF/L2S code that shows a common use case:

	var o = context.Produts.First(p => p.ProductId == 1); // Get a product from the db
	o.Name = "Updated"; // Update something
	context.SaveChanges(); // Tell the context to update the database with the change to the product.

Now, you can't do that in Dapper. It's not a fully fledged ORM like that. You'd have to do something like:

	var o = connection.Query<Product>("Select * from Prodcuts where Id = 1").First();
	o.Name = "Updated";
	oconnection.Execute("Update Procuct set Name = @Name where Id = 1",new {Name=o.Name});

In fact, that code is pointless, because the first 2 lines serve no purpose. But you get the point.
Fourtunately, Dapper is designed to be used as a building block to allow you to create the kind of functionality you need. I didn't want or need full blown change tracking or anything like that that EF just does for you. But I did want to be able to send updates/inserts to the DB without hand-crafting SQL all over the place. I also wanted a class that was a little bit more like the Context class that EF gives you, so that I could access all my db tables from them. This is where Dapper Rainbows came in for me...

Dapper Rainbows was written by Sam Saffron to wrap Dapper how he wanted to wrap it. He's written a great blog post about it and how it works with Dapper [here](samsaffron.com/archive/2012/01/16/that-annoying-insert-problem-getting-data-into-the-db-using-dapper). Again, it's a one-file drop in that works with Dapper. It gives you a nice wrapper that looks like this:

    public class MattsDatabase : Database<MattsDatabase>
    {
        [Table(Name = "tblproducts")]
        public Table<Product> Products { get; set; }
    }

So, using this, I can now rewrite that product update to something that looks like this:

	var o = myDatabase.Products.Query("Select * from Products where Id = 1");
	o.Name = "Updated";
	myDatabase.Products.Update(o);

Much nicer IMHO. This simple wrapper is taking care of a lot of the mundanity of building up the update SQL. It wasn't as simple as just using the Dapper.Rainbows file however - as Sam's blog post says, it's very opinionated - for example it assumes that all PKs are int and called "id", and that you're using SQL Server. None of these were true for us, we have mysql and some funky rules about where the ID values come from. So we created a heavily modified version of the rainbows file that works for our needs. We've got all our db rules nicely encapsulated in there and that's quite nice. 

## DAL-tastic

The only missing piece of the picture was making sure that the DAL logic was nicely encapsulated in it's own "layer" - After discussion we decided that we don't want the dapper class to be referenced directly from the MVC controllers because then we've got a dependency on the database that is going to make testing difficult (We did toy with the idea of just going with that and having a test db, and might actaully come back to that, but for now getting a test db set up is tricky for us). We had 2 options here:

1) Make our Dapper Rainbows wrapper class implement an interface (IAppDatabase or similar), and work against that interface in the controller. If we did this, then the tests could get a bit unwieldly when we're mocking out the databse.

2) Create a simple DAL class. For example a ProductsService DAL class, that implements IProductsService, that has methods like "GetProduct, Update, Insert" and the implementation of this uses the dapper wrapper. 
We went with #2. Yes, I know, it does look rather like a repository pattern doesn't it :) And yes, I accept that it's adding a lot of DAL noise to the projcet. It's something we're reviewing as we go along, and we might very well channge our mind as we use this.